---
title: "Rant: What am I even doing?"
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - rant
  - career
---

This has been a hard week. I just took the CodeSignal exam for Ethan Perez's MATS stream, and I got stuck on the 3rd part. I tried putting together a project for Neel Nanda's MATS stream on mechanistic interpretibilty, but I just felt like I was spinning my wheels. I've been working on this data poisoning project in collaboration with FAR, but all I seem to do it mess with configuration options I don't understand until somethin maybe works. The feedback times on these changes are so frustratin, that I don't know what I should be trying. I'm not a good enough coder to pass these interviews, and I don't have the research chops to come up with interesting ideas to work on. Is it even worth the effort for me to try to get better at all of this? Is this something I can even improve at? Or am I just stuck at this level, having just put in the minimum effort at my jobs to not get fired for the past 7 years? I want to give it my all, but I don't even feel like I have much more to give. Especially with LLMs getting better at coding, it feels like trying to invest my time and energy into getting better at it is just a waste of time. 

I want to try to maximize my positive impact with my career, but I feel like I've been floundering with this AI safety research engineer path. I compare myself to others and get discouraged. I don't know what to do. I'm turning 32 in a month, and I feel like I have nothing to show for it. This shit sucks.

